>> Woodruff: LEGAL LIMBO.
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S EXECUTIVE
ACTIONS ON IMMIGRATION ARE
STALLED IN FEDERAL COURT.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY, TOUGH
CHOICES FOR GREE, AECS BAILOUT
TALKS FALTER AMID THE THREAT OF
DEFAULT, AND NO CLEAR SOLUTION
IN SIGHT.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, THE REAL
PRICE OF GOLD.
FROM CHILD LABOR TO TOXIC
CHEMICALS.
WE DIG INTO THE DANGEROUS
CONDITIONS AT THE MINES FOR
THE PRECIOUS MINERAL.
>> THE FINAL STEP IN PROCESSING
THE GOLD BEGINS WITH A SPARK.
THE TINY BALLS OF MERCURY-
ENCASED GOLD DUST ARE BLASTED
WITH AN ACETYLENE TORCH,
RELEASING VAPORS THAT ARE PURE
POISON.
>> Ifill: AND:
>> OFTEN ON THIS END OF THE
ISLAND IS WHERE WE SEE THE
MAJORITY OF OUR SHOREBIRDS.
>> Ifill: ENDANGERED BIRDS
HEAD SOUTH FOR THE WINTER TO
THE SUNNY BAHAMAS.
SCIENTISTS WORK TO PROTECT THEIR
DISAPPEARING HABITAT FROM OVER-
DEVELOPMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> CLIMATE CHANGE IS A SERIOUS
THREAT TO THESE BIRDS, AND
EQUALLY SERIOUS IS HOW WE REACT
TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
WHEN WE LOSE THE HABITAT FOR
THESE BIRDS, WE LOSE THE BIRDS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION IS DELAYING THE
PRESIDENT'S EXECUTIVE ACTIONS ON
IMMIGRATION, AFTER A FEDERAL
JUDGE RULED IT DIDN'T FOLLOW
PROPER LEGAL PROCEDURE.
THE PRESIDENT'S ACTION WOULD
HAVE SHIELDED MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
FROM DEPORTATION.
IT WAS SET TO GO INTO EFFECT
TOMORROW.
THE TEXAS JUDGE'S RULING FREEZES
ACTIONS IN 26 STATES NOW SUING
THE GOVERNMENT.
THE ADMINISTRATION PUT THE
ACTION ON HOLD, BUT SAID IT WILL
APPEAL.
WE'LL HAVE MUCH MORE ON THIS
RIGHT AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
>> Woodruff: A WINTRY BLAST
HAS LEFT HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE WITHOUT POWER IN THE
MID-ATLANTIC AND SOUTHERN U.S.
THE CAROLINAS AND GEORGIA BORE
THE BRUNT OF THE OUTAGES
AFTER THE REGION WAS COVERED
WITH SEVERAL INCHES OF SNOW AND
ICE.
SNOW PLOWS WERE OUT IN FULL
FORCE TO CLEAR THE ROADS AND
HIGHWAYS.
>> WE WILL CONTINUE TO SEE
DOWNED TREES AND POWER LINES AS
THEY SUCCUMB TO THE WEIGHT OF
THE ICE.
SO THAT IS A BIG CONCERN AS THE
DAYS AND NIGHTS GO AHEAD, THE
ICE ON THE POWER LINES.
AND WHILE WE SEE SOME
TEMPERATURES RISE A FEW DEGREES
ABOVE FREEZING THIS AFTERNOON,
THESE TEMPERATURES WILL DROP
BELOW FREEZING TONIGHT CAUSING
OUR ROADS TO REFREEZE.
>> Woodruff: FARTHER NORTH IN
THE NATION'S CAPITAL, THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WAS CLOSED
TODAY AFTER THE AREA GOT UP TO
SIX INCHES OF SNOW OVERNIGHT.
THE SAME STORM SYSTEM IS NOW
BARRELING UP THE EAST COAST,
TOWARDS THE ALREADY WINTER-WEARY
RESIDENTS OF NEW ENGLAND.
>> Ifill: IN WEST VIRGINIA,
OFFICIALS LAUNCHED AN
INVESTIGATION INTO WHY A TRAIN
LOADED WITH OVER A HUNDRED
TANKERS FULL OF CRUDE OIL
DERAILED.
A MASSIVE FIREBALL ROSE HUNDREDS
OF FEET INTO THE AIR AFTER
YESTERDAY'S ACCIDENT IN MOUNT
CARBON.
THE TRACKS MAY HAVE BEEN
SLIPPERY FROM SNOWFALL, BUT IT'S
NOT CLEAR THAT CAUSED THE
ACCIDENT.
HUNDREDS OF FAMILIES EVACUATED
AND TWO WATER TREATMENT PLANTS
WERE FORCED TO CLOSE.
>> Woodruff: THE U.N. SECURITY
THE U.S. HAS CHANGED ITS RULES
ON WEAPON SALES AND WILL ALLOW
ARMED MILITARY DRONES TO BE SOLD
TO FRIENDLY NATIONS.
THE STATE DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCED
THE POLICY CHANGE TODAY.
ALLIES WHO BUY THE DRONES WILL
HAVE TO AGREE NOT TO USE THE
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT ILLEGALLY, FOR
UNLAWFUL SURVEILLANCE OR AGAINST
DOMESTIC POPULATIONS.
>> Ifill: INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIALS IN DENMARK ADMITTED
TODAY THEY HAD
>> Ifill: INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS
IN DENMARK ADMITTED TODAY THEY
HAD RECEIVED WARNINGS ABOUT
THE SUSPECTED GUNMAN IN LAST
WEEKEND'S SHOOTINGS IN
COPENHAGEN.
THEY CAME FROM PRISON OFFICIALS
WHO SAID OMAR ABDEL HAMID EL-
HUSSEIN WAS AT RISK OF
BECOMING RADICALIZED WHILE IN
JAIL LAST YEAR.
EL-HUSSEIN WAS KILLED IN A
SHOOTOUT WITH POLICE AFTER
HE KILLED TWO PEOPLE AT A
CULTURAL CENTER AND SYNAGOGUE.
>> Woodruff: THE PRESIDENT
OF EGYPT CALLED ON THE U.N.
TO FORM A COALITION AND
INTERVENE IN LIBYA TO FIGHT
THE THREAT OF ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS THERE.
THE REQUEST COMES AFTER THE
TERRORIST GROUP BEHEADED
21 EGYPTIAN COPTIC CHRISTIANS
IN LIBYA.
PRESIDENT ABDEL-FATTAH
EL-SISI MADE HIS PLEA DURING A
RECORDED RADIO INTERVIEW THAT
AIRED IN EGYPT TODAY.
>> ( translated ): WHAT IS GOING
ON IN LIBYA COULD CHANGE THIS
COUNTRY INTO A BREEDING GROUND
THAT WILL THREATEN THE WHOLE
REGION, AND NOT ONLY EGYPT.
EGYPT, THE MEDITERRANEAN BASIN
AND EUROPE HAVE TO DEAL WITH
THIS PROBLEM BECAUSE THE MISSION
WAS UNACCOMPLISHED, WAS
UNFINISHED BY OUR EUROPEAN
FRIENDS.
WE ABANDONED THE LIBYAN PEOPLE
AS PRISONERS TO EXTREMIST
MILITIAS.
>> Woodruff: THE U.N. SECURITY
COUNCIL WILL MEET FOR AN
EMERGENCY SESSION IN RESPONSE
TO THE CRISIS IN LIBYA TOMORROW.
>> Ifill: IN SYRIA TODAY, A
SURPRISE ATTACK ON SIX VILLAGES
BROUGHT GOVERNMENT FORCES CLOSER
TO THEIR GOAL OF TAKING BACK
REBEL-HELD NEIGHBORHOODS IN
ALEPPO.
PARTS OF THE COUNTRY'S LARGEST
CITY HAVE BEEN IN OPPOSITION
CONTROL SINCE 2012.
MORE THAN 100 PEOPLE DIED IN
HEAVY FIGHTING ON BOTH SIDES.
LATE THIS AFTERNOON, THE SYRIAN
ENVOY TO THE U.N. SAID NOW
THEY'RE WILLING TO SUSPEND THE
AERIAL BOMBARDMENT OF ALEPPO FOR
SIX WEEKS.
>> Woodruff: A SUICIDE ATTACK
KILLED AT LEAST 20 PEOPLE TODAY
AT A PROVINCIAL POLICE
HEADQUARTERS IN AFGHANISTAN.
FOUR TALIBAN BOMBERS STORMED THE
HEAVILY FORTIFIED COMPOUND ABOUT
40 MILES SOUTH OF KABUL.
LOCAL OFFICIALS SAID THEY WERE
DRESSED IN AFGHAN POLICE
UNIFORMS AND DETONATED THEIR
EXPLOSIVES IN SEVERAL WAVES.
EIGHT PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED.
>> Ifill: IN HAITI, THE FINAL
DAY OF CARNIVAL CELEBRATIONS WAS
CANCELED AFTER AN ACCIDENT ON
A FLOAT KILLED 16 PEOPLE AND
INJURED 78 OTHERS.
A SINGER ON A PARADE FLOAT RAN
INTO ELECTRICAL WIRES IN THE
EARLY MORNING HOURS, SETTING OFF
A STAMPEDE BY BYSTANDERS.
MANY OF THOSE KILLED WERE
TRAMPLED TO DEATH.
>> Woodruff: SCHOOLS ACROSS
LIBERIA BEGAN OPENING THEIR
DOORS THIS WEEK TO STUDENTS, FOR
THE FIRST TIME IN SIX MONTHS.
THEY WERE FORCED TO CLOSE WITH
THE SPREAD OF THE EBOLA VIRUS.
THE OUTBREAK KILLED NEARLY 4000
LIBERIANS, BUT THERE ARE NOW
ONLY A HANDFUL OF CASES.
BEFORE STUDENTS WERE ALLOWED IN,
TEACHERS EXPLAINED HOW TO
PROTECT AGAINST EBOLA.
SCHOOLCHILDREN ALSO HAD TO RINSE
THEIR HANDS AND HAVE THEIR
TEMPERATURE CHECKED.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET TODAY,
STOCKS EDGED SLIGHTLY HIGHER
AS INVESTORS KEPT A WARY EYE
ON TALKS OVER GREECE AND ITS
DEBT.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
WAS UP 28 POINTS TO CLOSE OVER
18,000.
THE NASDAQ ROSE FIVE POINTS.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 ADDED THREE
POINTS.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
ACTION ON IMMIGRATION PUT
ON HOLD;
GREECE'S UNCERTAIN ECONOMIC
FUTURE;
CHILD LABOR, TOXIC CHEMICALS
AND THE PURSUIT OF GOLD;
A NEW UNDERSTANDING OF THE
SYMPTOMS OF MENOPAUSE;
TRACKING ENDANGERED BIRDS
THAT HEAD SOUTH FOR THE WINTER;
AND FROM AFRICA TO AMERICA,
ALEXANDRA FULLER EXPLORES PLACE
IN A NEW MEMOIR.
>> Woodruff: WE NOW TURN
TO THAT IMMIGRATION DECISION
HANDED DOWN OVERNIGHT.
A FEDERAL JUDGE IN TEXAS
TEMPORARILY FROZE PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S LATEST EXECUTIVE ORDERS
ON IMMIGRATION, BLOCKING THEM
AS A LEGAL CHALLENGE BY TWO
DOZEN STATES MOVES THROUGH
THE COURTS.
THE JUDGE'S AION CTCENTERS ON
THE STEPS THE PRESIDENT
INITIATED IN NOVEMBER.
AT THAT TIME HE SAID HE WOULD
WAIVE DEPORTATION FOR AN
ADDITIONAL 4 TO 5 MILLION
PEOPLE, SOME BROUGHT TO
THE U.S. AS CHILDREN AND OTHERS
WHO ARE THE UNDOCUMENTED PARENTS
OF AMERICAN CITIZENS.
SIGN-UPS FOR THOSE WAIVERS WERE
SUPPOSED TO BEGIN TOMORROW.
BUT LAST NIGHT'S INJUNCTION
HALTED THAT.
IN A STRONGLY-WORDED OPINION,
JUDGE ANDREW HANEN OF THE
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS WROTE
THAT THE PRESIDENT'S ACTIONS ARE
QUOTE: "A MASSIVE CHANGE
IN IMMIGRATION PRACTICE"
BUT HANEN RULED LARGELY ON
PROCESS, WRITING THAT THE POLICY
QUOTE, "SHOULD HAVE UNDERGONE
THE  NOTICE-AND-COMMENT
PROCEDURE", ESSENTIALLY GET
90-DAYS OF COMMENTS BEFORE GOING
INTO EFFECT.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCED
IT WILL APPEAL THIS DECISION.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SPOKE TODAY TO
REPORTERS IN THE OVAL OFFICE
STATING THE LAW AND HISTORY
ARE ON HIS SIDE.
>> I DISAGREE WITH THE TEXAS
JUDGE'S RULING AND THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT WILL APPEAL.
THIS IS NOT FIRST TIME WHERE A
LOWER COURT JUDGE HAS BLOCKED
SOMETHING OR ATTEMPTED TO BLOCK
SOMETHING THAT ULTIMATELY WAS
SHOWN TO BE LAWFUL.
>> Woodruff: JOINING ME NOW
TO DISCUSS EXACTLY WHAT THIS
MEANS AND HOW IT MIGHT
IMPACT THE FIGHT OVER FUNDING
AND IMMIGRATION ON CAPITOL HILL
ARE: STEPHEN LEGOMSKY, PROFESSOR
OF LAW AT WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
IN ST. LOUIS AND ALAN GOMEZ,
IMMIGRATION REPORTER FOR "U.S.A.
TODAY" IN MIAMI.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH.
PROFESSOR LEGOMSKY, IT'S OUR
UNDERSTANDING THE JUDGE IN THIS
CASE DID NOT RULE ON THE MERITS
OF WHAT THE PRESIDENT DID BUT
RATHER ON A MORE NARROW
PROCEDURE IN HOW THIS WAS
CARRIED OUT.
EXPLAIN THAT.
>> YEAH, THAT'S CORRECT, JUDY.
UNDER A STATUTE CALLED "THE
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT,"
CERTAIN FEDERAL RULES AND
POLICIES HAVE TO GO THROUGH A
NOTICE AND COMMENT PROCESS, AS
YOU WERE DESCRIBING.
THE WAY IT WORKS IS THAT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ISSUES A
PROPOSED VERSION OF THIS RULE.
THE PUBLIC HAS A CHANCE TO
SUBMIT COMMENTS.
THE GOVERNMENT EVALUATES THOSE
COMMENTS AND THEN DECIDES HOW
BEST TO PROCEED IN LIGHT OF
THOSE COMMENTS.
THE ISSUE HERE IS THAT THERE IS
AN EXCEPTION TO THAT PROCEDURE.
IT'S NOT REQUIRED WHEN ALL THE
GOVERNMENT IS DOING IS OFFERING
GUIDANCE AS TO HOW IT PROPOSES
TO EXERCISE A DISCRETIONARY
POWER.
THE PLAINTIFF STATES FOR THEIR
PART THAT THEY DON'T BELIEVE
REAL DISCRETION IS BEING
EXERCISED.
WE THINK THESE DECISIONS ARE
LIKELY TO BE RUBBER-STAMPED.
THE GOVERNMENT FOR ITS PART IS
SAYING THE SECRETARY'S MEMO
EXPLICITLY AND REPEATEDLY
COMMANDS THE OFFICERS ON THE
GROUND TO LOOK AT THE FACTS OF
EACH INDIVIDUAL CASE AND TO
EXERCISE DISCRETION AND THERE IS
NO REASON OR EVIDENCE TO THINK
THE OFFICERS ARE GOING TO
SYSTEMATICALLY DISOBEY THE
SECRETARY AND THEY ALSO POINT
OUT THAT THERE HAVE BEEN ABOUT
38,000 DENIALS SO FAR, INCLUDING
SOME EXAMPLES WHERE IT WAS
UNDONE ON THE SIDE OF
DISCRETION.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S FOR
WAIVERS ON DEPORTATION.
WE KNOW ANOTHER COURT RULED
EARLIER IN FAVOR OF THE
PRESIDENT.
WHY DOES THIS RULING PREVAIL
THEN?
>> WELL, THE ACTION BY THE
DISTRICT COURT FOR THE COLUMBIA,
AS YOU'VE POINTED OUT, REACHED
THE OPPOSITE RESULT.
IT SIMPLY REFUSED TO ISSUE AN
INJUNGION.
SO THE RESULT OF THAT IS NOTHING
HAPPENED.
THIS IS ACTUALLY POSITIVE ACTION
BY THIS PARTICULAR JUDGE, AND
THEREFORE UNLESS A DECISION IS
UNDONE ON APPEAL, THE
ADMINISTRATION WOULD HAVE TO
COMPLY WITH THE NOTICE AND
NOTICE-AND-COMMENT PROCEDURE
THAT THIS JUDGE HAS SAID WAS
NECESSARY.
>> Woodruff: SO STEPHEN
LEGOMSKY, THE PRESIDENT HIMSELF
SAID TODAY THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION WILL APPEAL.
WE KNOW THEY WILL APPEAL TO THE
FIFTH CIRCUIT IN NEW ORLEANS,
KNOWN TO BE A CONSERVATIVE
COURT.
WHAT HAPPENS THEN?
DO WE HAVE ANY SENSE OF HOW LONG
THIS COULD TAKE IN DO YOU EXPECT
IT TO GO AS HIGH AS THE SUPREME
COURT?
WHAT ARE THE EXPECTATIONS?
>> WELL, THAT'S A GREAT
QUESTION.
IT'S VERY HARD TO PREDICT
EXACTLY WHAT THE GOVERNMENT CAN
DO ONCE IT FILES ITS APPEAL IS
FIRST OF ALL ASK THE COURT OF
APPEALS TO TEMPORARILY STAY,
THAT IS PUT ON HOLD THE
PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION THAT THE
JUDGE ORDERED.
THEY CAN ALSO ASK THE COURT TO
EXPEDITE ITS REVIEW.
I THINK THERE ARE A COUPLE
REASONS WHY IT MIGHT WANT THIS
EXPEDITED.
ONE IS THAT EVEN THOUGH THE COST
OF THIS PROGRAM, THE
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESSING COST
WILL BE PAID FOR BY THE
APPLICANTS THEMSELVES, THERE'S A
CASH FLOW ISSUE.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS THE HIRE
ADJUDICATORS AND TRAIN THEM
BEFORE THE REVENUE COMES IN, SO
THEY'LL WANT SOME INDICATION THE
PROGRAM IS GOING TO FLY.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO... GO
AHEAD.
I WANT THE MOVE ON THE ALAN
GOMEZ NOW WHO REPORTS ON THE
IMMIGRATION ISSUE REGULARLY.
ALAN, WHAT IS THE PRACTICAL
EFFECT OF THIS GOING TO BE ON
THE IMMIGRANT COMMUNITY IN THIS
COUNTRY?
>> WELL, THE PRACTICAL EFFECT IS
THAT YOU HAVE BASICALLY
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE WHO HAD
THEIR PAPERWORK READY, THEIR
APPLICATIONS READY TO GO.
THEY WERE READY TO RUN TOMORROW
TO THE POST OFFICE AND START
MAILING THESE INTO THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY.
OBVIOUSLY THEY WOKE UP TO THIS
NEWS THIS MORNING.
SO THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF... I'VE
BEEN TALKING WITH A LOT OF THEM
TODAY, A LOT OF JUST PAINFUL
CONFUSION THROUGHOUT THAT
COMMUNITY.
SOME OF THEM ARE JUST SORT OF
GIVING UP AND SAYING, ALL RIGHT,
WE KIND OF FIGURED SOMETHING
LIKE THIS WAS GOING TO HAPPEN,
SO THEY'RE MOVING ON, BUT A LOT
OF THEM ARE TRYING TO GET OUT
THE MESSAGE THAT AN APPEALS
COURT COULD OVERTURN THIS
RULING, THAT THIS PROGRAM CAN
STILL GO INTO EFFECT AT SOME
POINT, SO THERE'S A LOT OF
ACTION GOING ON THE URGE THEM TO
CONTINUE TO KEEP THEIR PAPERWORK
TO, CONTINUE GETTING READY SO IF
AND WHEN THAT DAY COMES WHEN THE
PROGRAM RESTARTS THEY CAN GO
AHEAD AND START JUMPING IN RIGHT
THERE.
>> BUT IN THE MEANTIME, THEY'RE
TRULY IN LIMBO HERE?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I MEAN, AS ONE OF THEM PUT IT TO
ME, WE'RE USED TO TOUGH TRAILS.
WE'RE USED TO TRUST VOYAGES.
A LOT OF THEM TALKING ABOUT
THOSE LONG TREKS THAT THEY MADE
THROUGH THE DESERTS AND THE
MOUNTAINS OF THE SOUTHWEST
BOARDER TO GET HERE, SO AS THEY
PUT IT, A COUPLE LEGAL HURDLES
ISN'T THAT BIG OF A DEAL, BUT
ABSOLUTELY.
IT'S ABSOLUTELY PAINFUL FOR A
LOT OF THEM.
THERE ARE A LOT OF TEARS SHED
AROUND THE COUNTRY AS THEY WOKE
UP TO THAT NEWS THIS MORNING.
A LOT OF FOLKS WOKE UP IN THE
MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT EXPECTING
THIS RULING AND SEEING IT.
SO IT'S REALLY DIFFICULT FOR
THEM TO SORT OF GET SO CLOSE, TO
BE ONE DAY AWAY FROM BEING ABLE
TO FINALLY BE LEGAL, BEING ABLE
TO FINALLY GO TO WORK WITHOUT
HAVING TO WORRY ABOUT LOOKING
OVER YOUR SHOULDER AND THEN ALL
OF A SUDDEN IT JUST GETS TAKEN
AWAY FROM THEM SOME IT'S BEEN A
ROUGH DAY.
>> QUICKLY, A QUESTION ABOUT
WHERE THIS LEAVES THE POLITICAL
FIGHT OVER IMMIGRATION.
WE KNOW IN THE CONGRESS RIGHT
NOW REPUBLICANS HOLDING UP
FUNDING FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY.
THEY SAY UNTIL THE PRESIDENT
WITHDRAWS THESE EXECUTIVE
ORDERS.
THE PRESIDENT SAYING, I'M NOT
GOING TO DO THAT.
SOME REPUBLICANS TODAY SAYING,
WELL, MAYBE WE BACK OFF AND LET
THIS GO THROUGH SINCE THE FIGHT
IS NOW IN THE COURTS.
OTHERS DISAGREE.
WHAT DO YOU SEE HAPPENING ON THE
POLITICAL FRONT?
>> WELL, IT'S... THE REPUBLICANS
ARE BASICALLY FACED WITH A
FASCINATING OPPORTUNITY NOW.
THEY'RE OFF THIS WEEK, SO THEY
HAVE A FEW DAYS TO GET TOGETHER
AND FIGURE OUT WHAT THEY'LL DO.
ON THE ONE WITH HAND, THEY CAN
SAY, OKAY, LOOK, THIS COURT HAS
RULED THAT THIS POTENTIALLY, IF
THIS IS A PROGRAM THAT NEEDS TO
BE STOPPED, SO WE NEED TO GO
FURTHER.
WE NEED TO PUSH HARDER TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE PRESIDENT ENDS
THIS PROGRAM AND WE USE THIS
FUNDING BILL TO END IT.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, THEY CAN
EASILY SAY, THEY GOT SOME COVER
NOW SAYING, LOOK, IT LOOKS LIKE
THE COURTS WILL TAKE CARE OF
THIS, WE HAVE ONE RULING THAT'S
FAVORABLE TO US, SO NOW WE CAN
KIND OF PULL OUT THAT... PULL
THAT OUT OF THE FUNDING FIGHT
AND ALLOW THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAMOVE FORWARD WITHOUT RISKG
A GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN, WHICH IS
WHAT WE'RE FACING BY FEBRUARY
27th WHEN THE DEPARTMENT
RUNS OUT OF MONEY.
>>
>> Woodruff: WELL, IT'S
CERTAINLY GOTTEN ALL OF OUR
ATTENTION.
WE WILL BE WATCHING VERY
CLOSELY.
ALAN GOMEZ, PROFESSOR STEPHEN
LEGOMSKY, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: THE ESCALATING
STANDOFF BETWEEN GREECE AND
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION SHOWED LITTLE SIGN
OF ABATING TODAY, PROMPTING MORE
QUESTIONS ABOUT WHETHER THE
COUNTRY MIGHT SOON RUN OUT OF
MONEY; WHETHER IT WOULD AGREE TO
CONTINUING AUSTERITY CUTS; OR
POSSIBLY LEAVE THE EUROZONE
ALTOGETHER.
>> Ifill: THE DEMAND FROM THE
E.U. TO GREECE: AGREE TO AN
EXTENSION OF A QUARTER-TRILLION
DOLLAR BAILOUT PROGRAM BY FRIDAY
OR RISK LOSING ASSISTANCE
ALTOGETHER.
THAT IS NOT SOMETHING MANY GREEK
CITIZENS WANT TO HEAR.
>> ( translated ): I AM ANGRY
WITH THE LOGIC OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION.
PERHAPS WE SHOULD CONSIDER FROM
NOW ON HOW THIS COUNTRY WILL
ACQUIRE A DIFFERENT POLICY, ONE
THAT COULD POSSIBLY BE OUTSIDE
THE FRAME OF THE EUROPEAN UNION.
>> Ifill: STILL, SOME HAVE
CALLED ON THE POPULAR NEW LEFT-
WING GOVERNMENT TO REIGN IN ITS
RESISTANCE TO WHAT THEY HAVE
TERMED AN "ULTIMATUM."
>> ( translated ): I WOULD HAVE
LIKED THEM TO BE MORE SERIOUS
FROM THE VERY BEGINNING.
WHEN YOU'RE ASKING WITH YOUR
HAND STRETCHED OUT YOU CAN'T
HAVE THIS ATTITUDE.
>> Ifill: EUROPEAN NATIONS HAVE
PROPPED UP GREEK'S UNSTEADY
FINANCES SCE 2IN010, IN EXCHANGE
FOR  DEEP SPENDING CUTS.
BUT WITH UNEMPLOYMENT TOPPING 25
PERCENT AND SHRINKING BANK
DEPOSITS, MANY WHO VOTED FOR THE
NEW GOVERNMENT BLAME THE
AUSTERITY ITSELF FOR THE
COUNTRY'S ECONOMIC ILLS.
IN BRUSSELS TODAY, THE GREEK
FINANCE MINISTER, WHO CAMPAIGNED
ON A PROMISE TO SCRAP THE
BAILOUT, DENOUNCED A PLAN TO
EXTEND IT ASABSU "RD."
BUT HE DID NOT RULE OUT A DEAL.
>> THE NEXT STEP IS THE
RESPONSIBLE STEP.
EUROPE WOULD CONTINUE TO
DELIBERATE IN ORDER TO ENHANCE
THE CHANCES OF, AND ACTUALLY
ACHIEVE, A VERY GOOD OUTCOME FOR
THE AVERAGE EUROPEAN, NOT FOR
>> Ifill: HIS GERMAN
COUNTERPART, SPEAKING ON BEHALF
OF THE EUROZONE, SAID ATHENS'
GOAL REMAINED UNCLEAR:
>> ( translated ): GRCE NEEEEDS
TO DECIDE WHETHER THEY WANT THE
PROGRAM OR NOT.
NOBODY UNDERSTANDS WHAT GREECE
WANTS, AND IF GREECE KNOWS WHAT
IT WANTS.
>> Ifill: ABSENT AGREEMENT, THE
CURRENT BAILOUT PLAN EXPIRES AT
THE END OF THE MONTH.
FROM THE STREETS OF GREECE TO
THE FLOORS OF INTERNATIONAL
MARKETS WE LOOK AT WHAT'S AT
STAKE IN THE STANDOFF WITH
JOURNALIST JOHN PSARAPOULOS IN
ATHENS AND JACOB KIRKEGAARD,
SENIOR FELLOW AT THE PETERSON
INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMICS.
JOHN PSARAPOULOS, WHAT STARTED
THIS?
WHY THE BREAKDOWN ON MONDAY?
>> I THINK THAT THE PROBLEM
CENTERS AROUND THE FACT THAT
YOU'VE GOT A LEFT-WING, RADICAL
LEFT-WING GOVERNMENT IN ATHENS,
WHICH WANTS TO GO FULLY
FRONTALLY AGAINST THE WHOLE
CONCEPT OF AUSTERITY ACROSS THE
PERIPHERY OF EUROPE.
IT WANTS TO RAISE THE BANNER OF
INVOLVEERNTY AND
SELF-DETERMINATION -- THE BANNER
OF SOVEREIGNTY AND
SELF-DETERMINATION, IN OTHER
WORDS TELLING GERMANY IT CAN'T
TELL OTHER COUNTRIES TO DO WITH
THEIR NATIONAL BUDGETS AND WITH
THEIR ECONOMIC AND FISCAL
POLICIES.
I THINK THAT A LOT OF THE
ACRIMONY THAT'S BEEN SEEN, NOT
JUST ON MONDAY, BUT ALSO IN LAST
WEAK'S EURO GROUP, HAS CENTERED
AROUND THE POLITICAL SYMBOLISM
OF THAT STANDOFF, NOT SO MUCH
THE SUBSTANCE, THE FACT THAT THE
GREEKS ARE BEING TOLD BY THE
GERMANS THEY'RE RUNNING ECONOMIC
DEFICITS AND THEY'RE COMING BACK
TO THE GERMANS AND TELLING THEM
THAT THEY ARE RUNNING DEMOCRATIC
DEFICITS.
AND BOTH SIDES, OF COURSE RUSSIA
SAYING THAT BOTH THESE DEFICITS
ARE GOING TO BE DETRIMENTAL TO
THE FUTURE OF EUROPE.
SO THE GREEKS ARE TRYING TO
PRESENT THEMSELVES AS BEING ON
AN EQUAL FOOTING EVEN THOUGH
THEY ARE THE DEBTORS IN THIS
ARGUMENT.
>> Ifill: JACOB KIRKEGAARD, IS
THIS KIND OF POLITICAL AND
ECONOMIC STANDOFF MEAN SURE
DISASTER FOR GREECE?
ARE THEY HIDED -- HEADED TO
DEFAULT?
>> I DON'T THINK WE'RE THERE
YET.
I THINK WE'RE IN THE POLITICAL
THEATER SCENE SO TO SPEAK,
BECAUSE YOU HAVE A NEWLY ELECTED
GREEK GOVERNMENT THAT WAS
ELECTED ON A LOT OF PROMISE, A
LOT OF THINGS THEY WOULD DO, AND
MANY, INCLUDING MYSELF, WOULD
ARGUE THAT MANY OF THOSE
ELECTION PROMISES ARE AT ODDS
WITH ECONOMIC REALITY.
SO YOU ARE IN A SITUATION WHERE
THE GREEK GOVERNMENT IS GOING TO
HAVE TO RENEGE ON MANY OF THOSE
PROMISES, AND ONE OF THE THINGS
IN WHICH YOU DO THAT IS TO AT
LEAST APPEAR TO BE FIGHTING TO
THE LAST DROP OF BLOOD
POLITICALLY FOR THE INTERESTS OF
THE GREEK PEOPLE, ET CETERA.
SO I DON'T THINK YOU WILL GET A
DEAL UNTIL FIVE MINUTES TO
MIDNIGHT, AND WE'RE IN THE QUITE
THERE YET.
>> Ifill: JOHN PSARAPOULOS, I
WANT TO BOUNCE SOME OF THAT OFF
OF YOU.
YOU'RE TALKING TO PEOPLE, THERE
NOT ONLY THE POLITICIANS BUT
ALSO THE RESIDENTS OF GREECE.
THIS IS A VERY POPULAR
GOVERNMENT.
THIS IS A VERY POPULAR STANCE TO
PUSH BACK AGAINST THE E.U.
DOES THE E.U. JUST SEEM HEAVY
HANDED TO THE RESIDENTS OF
GREECE?
>> WELL, YES.
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE NOW
GATHERED AROUND THIS GOVERNMENT
TO SUPPORT IT, PRIVATELY AND
PUBLICLY.
WHAT'S REMARKABLE IS THAT
OPINION POLLS LAST WEEK SHOWED
THAT THE NUMBER OF GREEKS WHO
SUPPORT THIS GOVERNMENT NOW HAS
TROUBLED SINCE THE ELECTION
COMPARED TO THE NUMBER OF GREEKS
WHO VOTED FOR IT.
AND I THINK THERE WAS A GREAT
DEAL OF CONCERN.
PEOPLE ARE NERVOUS.
THERE'S BEEN A SLOW BANK RUN
HERE.
ABOUT $17 BILLION HAS BEEN
WITHDRAWNS FROM BANKS IN JUST
TWO MONTHS.
PEOPLE KNOW WHAT IS AT STAKE.
THEY KNOW IT'S A HIGH-RISK
STRATEGY TO ELECT AN
ANTI-AUSTERITY GOVERNMENT IN THE
MIDST OF AN AUSTERITY PROGRAM.
THEY KNOW HOW WEAK GREECE'S
POSITION IS IN EUROPE.
THEY KNOW THAT GREECE CAN BE
FORCED TO LEAVE THE EUROZONE IF
ITS LIQUIDITY IS CUT OFF BY THE
EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK AND THE
EUROZONE COUNTRIES.
SO, YES, I MEAN, PEOPLE HAVE
SHOWN A REMARKABLE KIND OF
COURAGE.
NONETHELESS, IN GATHERING AROUND
THIS GOVERNMENT AND SHOWING
SOLIDARITY AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE
AS A NATION RATHER THAN A
LEFT-WING FACTION.
HAVING SAID THAT, THERE ARE, OF
COURSE, THOSE WHO DISAGREE WITH
A LOT OF THE SPECIFICS OF WHAT
HAS BEEN SAID.
THEY THINK WE'VE TAKE AN STEP
TOO FAR AND TREADED ON EUROPEAN
TOES AND ON THE TRADITIONAL
VALUES OF CONSENSUS WITHIN
EUROPE.
>> Ifill: YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
THE POPULAR PARTY JUST ELECTED
TO GOVERNMENT.
SO WHAT IS IT THE E.U. IS ASKING
FOR AND WHAT CAN THEY HOPE TO
GET REALISTICALLY?
>> WELL, I THINK A TWO-STAGE
APPROACH HERE.
THERE IS FIRST APPROACH AND
FIRST STAGE WHERE BASICALLY THE
E.U. IS TELLING THE NEW GREEK
GOVERNMENT, YOU HAVE TO ASK FOR
AN EXTENSION OF THE EXISTING
PROGRAM WITH GREECE.
WHAT THAT BASICALLY IS SAYING,
IT'S SYMBOLIC.
WHAT IT MEANS IS THAT YOU, A
NEWLY ELECTED GREEK GOVERNMENT,
HAVE TO ACCEPT THAT IN A
CURRENCY UNION, YOU ARE NOT A
FULLY SOVEREIGN GOVERNMENT AND
YOU'RE IN THE A FULLY SOVEREIGN
COUNTRY.
YOU HAVE TO PLAY BY THE RULES
AND PART OF THESE RULES RUSSIA
YOU KNOW, AGREEING IN THEORY OR
IN PRACTICE, BUT THERE IS AN
EXISTING PROGRAM SOME THE GREEKS
HAVE TO ASK FOR AN EXTENSION OF
THAT PROGRAM.
THEN ONCE THAT IS DONE, WE CAN
SIT DOWN AND HAVE A LONGER-TERM
NEGOTIATION ABOUT WHAT IS THE
RELATIONSHIP GOING TO LOOK LIKE
BETWEEN THE EURO AREA, THE OTHER
CREDITORS AND GREECE YEARS
AHEAD.
>> Ifill: IS THERE ANY
DISCUSSION UNDER WAY AT ALL
ABOUT THE FACT THERE MAY NOT BE
A RELATIONSHIP, THAT THIS MAY BE
THE BEGINNING OF GREECE ENDING
THE EUROZONE IN.
>> I THINK THE PROBABILITY OF AN
EXIT OF GREECE FROM THE YOUR
ZONE IS EXTREMELY LOW, BECAUSE I
THINK AS JOHN SAID FROM ATHENS
THAT THERE IS A CLEAR
RECOGNITION IN GREECE THAT
THERE'S A LOT AT RISK HERE.
SO FAR THE POSTURING, IF YOU
LIKE, BY THE GOVERNMENT IS
POPULAR, BUT AT THE SAME TIME,
MANY GREEKS, WE'VE SEEN THAT IT
WAS MENTIONED, THAT MORE AND
MORE PEOPLE ARE TAKING THEIR
MONEY OUT OF THE BANK.
SO THEY'RE HEDGING.
ONCE THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES,
WHICH WOULD BE VERY DRAMATIC FOR
GREECE IF THERE'S A BREAK WITH
THE EUROZONE, THE GOVERNMENT
WILL MONEY OUT OF MONEY IN A
MATTER OF A RELATIVELY FEW
WEEKS.
IT DOESN'T MATTER THAT YOU HAVE
A GREAT EWILL ELECTION PROGRAM
AND A LOT OF PUBLIC SPENDING
YOU'D LIKE TO DO AND A LOT OF
PUBLIC OFFICIALS YOU'D LIKE TO
REHIRE.
IF YOU'RE OUT OF CASH.
SO ONCE THE SCREWS ARE BEING
TIGHTENED ON THE GREEK ECONOMY,
WHICH THEY WILL VERY RAPIDLY, I
THINK THERE WILL BE A REAL CRUDE
AWAKENING BY THE MANY PEOPLE WHO
RIGHT NOW IN THE OPINION POLL
SUPPORT THE GREEK GOVERNMENT.
>> Ifill: WE'RE WAITING FOR
ANOTHER SHOE TO DROP ON FRIDAY
AND PERHAPS ANOTHER ONE NEXT
WEEK.
JOHN PSARAPOULOS IN ATHENS AND
JACOB KIRKEGAARD HERE IN
WASHINGTON, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: THE CHINESE NEW
YEAR, CELEBRATED THIS WEEK,
OFTEN MARKS A FRENZY OF GOLD-
BUYING.
BUT SOME OF THAT GOLD COMES
AT A HIGH PRICE FOR THE
IMPOVERISHED NATIONS THAT
PRODUCE IT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S P.J. TOBIA
HAS THIS REPORT, THE LATEST INH.
PRICE.
IT WAS PRODUCED IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE PULITZER CENTER ON
CRISIS REPORTING.
>> Reporter: THESE BEST FRIENDS,
DUKU AND YOYO, JUST EIGHT AND
TEN YEARS OLD, EARN JUST A FEW
DOLLARS A DAY, EVERY DAY, MINING
GOLD IN SULAWESI, INDONESIA.
YOYO'S MOTHER THINKS IT MAY BE
ALL THEY EVER DO.
>> I HAVE A PLAN TO GET OUT OF
HERE, JUST NO MONEY.
>> Reporter: DUKU AND YOYO HAVE
WORKED THE MINES FOR TWO YEARS.
THEY DON'T GET MANY BREAKS, THEY
DON'T HAVE ANY TOYS, AND THEY'RE
NOT IN SCHOOL REGULARLY.
>> YOYO CAN READ A LITTLE BUT
DUKU CANNOT BECAUSE HE HASN'T
GONE TO SCHOOL YET.
>> Reporter: WHEN ASKED IF HE'D
RATHER BE IN SCHOOL, DUKU JUST
SHRUGS AND GETS BACK TO WORK.
OTHER CHILDREN LABOR
UNDERGROUND, UNFORTUNATELY WELL
SUITED FOR THIS WORK.
TINY TUNNELS, TINY BODIES.
SMALL, ARTISANAL GOLD MINES CAN
BE FOUND ON EVERY CONTINENT,
OFTEN IN REMOTE REGIONS OF
UNSTABLE COUNTRIES.
INDONESIA IS ONE OF THE WORLD'S
LEADING SUPPLIERS OF THIS
PRECIOUS METAL.
THE PHILIPPINES ALSO PRODUCES
TONS OF GOLD.
MUCH OF IT RIPPED FROM THE EARTH
BY HANDS LIKE THESE.
PARENTS DON'T CHOOSE THIS LIFE
FOR THEIR CHILDREN, BUT THERE'S
NO OTHER OPTION.
>> PARENTS ARE FORCING THEM.
>> Reporter: CARLOS CONDE IS A
RESEARCHER AT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
IN THE PHILIPPINES.
>> YOU ALWAYS HAVE THAT ISSUE
THERE OF PARENTS, IF NOT
FORCING, AT LEAST CONVINCING
THEM THAT THEY HAVE TO WORK IN
THE FIELDS, THAT THEY HAVE TO
WORK IN THE FACTORY OR THAT THEY
HAVE TO WORK IN THE MINING
OPERATIONS.
IT'S POVERTY BASICALLY.
>> Reporter: THESE CHILDREN
SPEND THEIR DAYS CRUSHING THE
ROCKS THAT MINERS LIKE DUKU AND
YOYO CHISEL FROM THE EARTH.
THEY SIFT THROUGH THE ORE,
LOOKING FOR SPARKLING GOLD
RESIDUE, NO BIGGER THAN A GRAIN
OF SAND.
IT'S TEDIOUS, BUT THE WORST IS
STILL AHEAD.
LIQUID MERCURY, ONE OF THE MOST
DANGEROUS HEAVY METALS ON THE
PLANET, IS USED THROUGHOUT THE
PROCESSING OF GOLD ORE.
>> MERCURY IS AN IMMEDIATE
PUBLIC HEALTH ISSUE BECAUSE IT'S
TOXIC, ITS ONE OF THE MOST
POTENT NEUROTOXINS OUT THERE.
>> Reporter: DEMETRIA DURANO
OWNS A FEW OF THESE PROCESSING
CENTERS IN THE PHILIPPINES.
SHE'S WORKED WITH MERCURY FOR
MUCH OF HER LIFE.
>> ( translated ): SOME OF MY
OPERATORS WILL REALLY GET SICK
BECAUSE WHEN THEY OPEN THE
TUMBLERS, THEY INHALE, IF THERE
IS MERCURY IT REALLY STINKS.
THEY DON'T WEAR MASKS AND THAT'S
WHY MOST OF MY OPERATORS GET
SICK.
THEY LOOK PALE AND THEIR SKIN
TURNS YELLOW.
>> Reporter: WHILE IT DESTROYS
THE BODY, MERCURY IS A CHEAP WAY
TO PROTECT THE GOLD FROM DIRT
AND ROCK PARTICLES.
>> ( translated ): SOMETIMES I
FEEL SO WEAK AFTERWARDS.
I ALWAYS WASH RIGHT AWAY.
I WASH MY HANDS WITH SOAPY
WATER.
BUT YOU WILL REALLY GET A
HEADACHE, YOU WILL REALLY FEEL
BADLY.
>> Reporter: RICHARD GUTIERREZ
IS THE FOUNDER AND DIREOR OCTF
"BAN TOXICS," AN ORGANIZATION IN
THE PHILIPPINES DEDICATED TO
PREVENTING THE TRADE OF TOXIC
CHEMICALS.
>> ITS A HEAVY METAL, THEREFORE
IT IS PERSISTENT.
IT'S PERSISTENT THEREFORE IT BIO
ACCUMULATES IN THE FOOD CHAIN IN
A COUNTRY SUCH AS THE
PHILIPPINES, COMPOSED OF 7,100
ISLANDS AT LEAST, EATING
SEAFOOD, SEAFOOD IS A PRIMARY
SOURCE OF PROTEIN FOR BOTH
SINCE MERCURY BIO ACCUMULATES,
IT BIO ACCUMULATES IN THE SEA
,OOD, SO IT'S POISONING
CONTAMINATING A MAJOR PROTEIN
SOURCE FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: THE FINAL STEP IN
PROCESSING THE GOLD BEGINS WITH
A SPARK.
THE TINY BALLS OF MERCURY-
ENCASED GOLD DUST ARE BLASTED
WITH AN ACETYLENE TORCH,
RELEASING VAPORS THAT ARE PURE
POISON.
UNPROTECTED WORKERS BREATH IT
ALL IN.
THE DANGER REACHES WELL BEYOND
HERE.
CHARLITA BALWIS SPENT NEARLY A
DECADE AS A HEALTH INSPECTOR IN
THE TOWN OF DIWAL WAL,
PHILIPPINES, WHERE SMALL-SCALE
GOLD MINING IS A WAY OF LIFE.
SHE BECAME ILL FROM THE MERCURY
SMOKE.
>> ( translated ): OUR HEALTH
CENTER WAS ON THE TOP FLOOR OF A
BUILDING, NEAR A CHIMNEY FROM
ONE OF THE GOLD MELTING SHOPS.
IT WAS TOO CLOSE TO OUR CENTER.
EVEN IF WE JUST STOOD UP WE
REALLY INHALED IT.
>> Reporter: SHE ESTIMATES 50%
OF THE TOWNSPEOPLE HAVE SHOWN
SYMPTOMS OF MERCURY POISONING.
>> ( translated ): MOST OF THE
PEOPLE WHO COOK OR MELT THE GOLD
FELT TREMORS.
BUT IT WASN'T JUST THE WORKERS.
ALSO JUST PEOPLE WHO WERE
PASSERS-BY, BECAUSE THEY WOULD
INHALE THEMOK SE.
SO WE CANT JUST SAY THAT ONLY
THE ONE WHO COOKS OR MELTS THE
GOLD IS THE ONE THAT'S BEEN
CONTAMINATED OR INFECTED.
ALSO ANYONE WHO LIVED NEARBY.
>> Reporter: EVEN WHEN THE
SYMPTOMS SUBSIDE, THE HEAVY
METAL STAYS IN THE SYSTEM AND
WILL LIKELY MAIM OR KILL.
>> YOU DO HAVE DEFORMITIES,
CHILDREN THAT ARE BORN WITH,
THAT ARE DISFIGURED.
SO THESE TYPES OF SYMPTOMS,
ESPECIALLY THE MORE BENIGN ONES
OR UNSEEN ONES, MAKE SCREENING
FOR MERCURY POISONING VERY
DIFFICULT, ESPECIALLY FOR HEALTH
WORKERS THAT ARE UNTRAINED AND
UNFAMILIAR WITH THE SYMPTOMS.
>> Reporter: DEALERS KEEP A
STEADY SUPPLY OF MERCURY
AVAILABLE IN MINING TOWNS.
THIS WOMAN RUNS A SHOP IN
SULAWESI, INDONESIA.
SHE SAYS THAT CUSTOMERS COME DAY
AND NIGHT FOR THE MERCURY SHE
SUPPLIES.ONE WEEK WE SELL ONE T,
EACH TANK IS 34 KILOS.
SO IN A MONTH WE CAN SELL MORE
THAN 120 KILOS.
>> Reporter: FIVE YEARS AGO SHE
STARTED SELLING MERCURY
ILLEGALLY.
SHE WAS ARRESTED BUT NOT JAILED.
INSTEAD, THE POLICE PUT HER IN
TOUCH WITH A LEGAL SUPPLIER.
THEY NOW DO BUSINESS TOGETHER.
IT'S AN EXAMPLE OF HOW THE LOCAL
AUTHORITIES ARE COMPLICIT IN
THIS DEADLY TRADE.
>> ( translated ): THIS WAS MADE
IN SPAIN, PREVIOUSLY THERE WAS
SOME FROM AMERICA.
>> Reporter: WHEN ASKED ABOUT
MERCURY'S HEALTH AFFECTS ON HER
COMMUNITY, SHE SHRUGS.>> ( tranI
DO?
I'M HERE TO MAKE A LIVING ALSO.
WE NEED IT, OTHERS NEED IT,
WHICH MEANS ALL OF US HERE NEED
EACH OTHER.
MERCURY SUPPORTS THIS CHAIN.
>> Reporter: THE END OF THAT
CHAIN IS OFTEN CHINA OR INDIA.
SOME OF IT ENDS UP IN LOCAL
MARKETS, LIKE THIS GOLD SHOP IN
BORNEO.
GOLD FROM ARTISINAL MINES MAKES
UP ONLY TEN TO FIFTEEN PERCENT
OF THE FOUR TON GLOBAL GOLD
MARKET, ACCORDING TO ANALYSTS AT
THOMPSON REUTERS.
BUT AFTER IT'S PROCESSED, GOLD
IS IMPOSSIBLE TO TRACE.
L.J. JOHNSON IE
INTERNATIONAL LABOR OFFICE IN
THE PHILIPPINES
>> WHETHER WE'RE TALKING GOLD OR
SILVER THAT WE BUY, ITS A BULK
COMMODITY.
SO WHEN WE ASK CONSUMERS, ARE
YOU SURE THAT RING THAT YOU'RE
WEARING, THE EARRING, THE
NECKLACES ARE FREE FROM CHILD
LABOR?
THAT'S MORE DIFFICULT.
BUT ITS UP TO CONSUMERS TO START
MAKING THAT CHOICE.
>> Reporter: IN A TRAGIC IRONY,
THERE IS A CHEAPER, EASILY
AVAILABLE AND EVEN MORE
EFFICIENT ALTERNATIVE TO USING
MERCURY WHEN PROCESSING GOLD.
IT'S BORAX, COONLMMY FOUND IN
HOUSEHOLD CLEANING PRODUCTS.
BUT GUTIERREZ OF BAN TOXICS,
SAYS IT'S ONLY BEING USED IN A
FEW PHILIPPINE COMMUNITIES.
>> THE UTILIZATION OF BORAX AT
THE REFINING STAGE, TO IMPROVE
GOLD QUALITY SO THAT WHEN THEY
SELL IT TO THE GOLD BUYERS, THEY
GET MORE MONEY IN RETURN.
SO THIS IS AN IDEAL PROCESS OR
ERETH IS AN EXISTING COMMUNITY
OF MINERS WHO HAVE ADOPTED IT.
>> Reporter: BUT CHANGE COMES
SLOWLY WITH THESE OLD METHODS
AND THEIR YOUNG VICTIMS.
>> INTRODUCING ALTERNATIVES TO
COMMUNITIES IS MUCH TRICKIER
THAN IT SOUNDS.
IT'S NOT JUST ABOUT PLANTING A
TECHNOLOGY IN FRONT OF THEM AND
SAYING THIS MAKES YOUR JOB
EASIER.
>> Reporter: EVEN IF THE PROBLEM
OF MERCURY POLLUTION AND
POISONING IS SOLVED, DUKU AND
YOYO WILL CONTINUE TO MINE FOR
GOLD, PROBABLY FOR THE REST OF
THEIR LIVES, AS LONG AS POVERTY
PERSISTS, AND GOLD DUST CAN HELP
PUT FOOD ON THE TABLE.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN FIND LINKS
TO MORE OF LARRY C. PRICE'S
WORK FOR THE PULITZER CENTER
ON OUR WEBSITE, INCLUDING
PHOTO ESSAYS, A PODCAST AND
AN EBOOK ON GOLD MINING ISSUES
AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Woodruff: IT'S WELL KNOWN
THAT FOUR OUT OF EVERY FIVE
MIDDLE-AGED WOMEN DEAL WITH
HOT FLASHES, NIGHT SWEATS AND
OTHER DIFFICULT SYMPTOMS OF
MENOPAUSE.
NEW RESEARCH FINDS THOSE
SYMPTOMS OFTEN LAST
A GREAT DEAL LONGER THAN
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM HAD IT.
IT COMES FROM THE LARGEST STUDY
OF ITS KIND DONE SO FAR OF MORE
THAN 3,300 WOMEN.
IT CONCLUDED THAT TTHE MEDIAN
DURATIONFOR HOT FLASHES
LASTED SEVEN YEARS, AND THAT IN
SOME CASES SYMPTOMS CAN LAST AS
LONG AS 14 YEARS.
MOREOVER, THE PROBLEMS WERE
WORSE FOR SOME WOMEN OF COLOR.
THE MEDIAN DURATION WAS 10 YEARS
FOR AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMEN AND
ALMOST NINE YEARS FOR LATINAS.
NANCY AVIS IS THE LEAD
RESEARCHER OF THE STUDY.
SHE'S A PROFESSOR OF PUBLIC
HEALTH SCIENCES AT WAKE FOREST
BAPTIST MEDICAL CENTER IN
WINSTON-SALEM, NORTH CAROLINA.
PROFESSOR AVIS, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
WHAT IS DIFFERENT THAT WAS
LEARNED IN THIS STUDY THAT
WASN'T PREVIOUSLY UNDERSTOOD?
>> I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT IS DIFFERENT IS THAT WE
WERE ABLE TO FOLLOW WOMEN FOR A
LONGER PERIOD OF TIME, SO WE DID
LEARN THAT THERE ARE WOMEN WHO
EXPERIENCE HOT FLASHES FOR AT
LEAST 14 YEARS, THAT UP TO 40%
OF OUR SAMPLE WAS STILL
EXPERIENCING HOT FLASHES, NIGHT
SWEATS AFTER 14 IT UNDERSTOOD AE
WHY THAT IS HAPPENING AND HOW
MANY WOMEN ARE EXPERIENCING IT?
>> WELL, IN OUR SAMPLE, IT'S
ABOUT 40% OF OUR SAMPLE THAT'S
STILL EXPERIENCING HOT FLASHES
AT THAT TIME.
WE WILL CONTINUE... WE ARE
CONTINUING TO FOLLOW WOMEN AND
WE WILL KNOW IN A FEW YEARS HOW
MUCH LONGER THEY MIGHT LAST AND
WHAT THAT PERCENTAGE IS.
BUT THIS IS WHAT WE FOUND AT
THIS TIME.
>> AND WHAT ABOUT IN TERMS OF
THE WHY?
>> WELL, WE DO KNOW THAT WOMEN
WHO BEGIN TO GET THEIR HOT
FLASHES WHEN THEY'RE YOUNGER AND
EARLIER BEFORE THEY REACH
MENOPAUSE EXPERIENCE THEM A
LONGER PERIOD OF TIME AND WOMEN
WHO DON'T GET THEM UNTIL THEY
REACH MENOPAUSE EXPERIENCE THEM
A SHORTER PERIOD OF TIME.
AND THAT WAS A BIG DIFFERENCE
THAT WE FOUND.
>> SO BAD NEWS POTENTIALLY IF IT
HAPPENS SOONER RATHER THAN
LATER.
WHAT ABOUT OTHER CORRELATIONS
AMONG WOMEN EXPERIENCING THESE
SYMPTOMS OF HOT FLASHES LONGER.
WE MENTIONED A DIFFERENCE IN
RACIAL, ETHNIC GROUPS, IS THAT
RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND AS YOU POINTED OUT, WE DID
FIND THAT AFRICAN AMERICAN WOMEN
REPORTED THEM FOR A LONGER
PERIOD OF TIME, AND IN OUR
SAMPLE, WE HAD CHINESE AND
JAPANESE WOMEN LIVING IN THE
U.S., BUT OF CHINESE AND
JAPANESE ORIGIN, AND THEY
EXPERIENCE,ED THEM FOR A SHORTER
PERIOD OF TIME.
>> AND AGAIN, ANY UNDERSTANDING
OF WHY THAT WOULD BE?
>> YOU KNOW, WE HAVE FOUND THIS
IN CROSS SECTIONAL STUDIES
CONDUCTED AROUND THE WORLD WHERE
ASIAN WOMEN DO TEND TO REPORT IN
GENERAL, FEWER HOT FLASHES AND
WE'VE ALSO FOUND IN THE U.S.
THAT AFRICAN AMERICAN WOMEN
REPORT MORE HOT FLASHES IN TERMS
OF PREVALENCE.
SO THAT'S A CONSISTENT FINDING.
IT'S VERY HARD TO TRY TO FIGURE
OUT JUST WHY BECAUSE THERE COULD
BE DIFFERENCES IN LIFESTYLE,
DIFFERENCES IN DIET,
REPRODUCTIVE FACTORS, HORMONAL
FACTORS.
IT'S VERY COMPLICATED.
IT'S A FASCINATING QUESTION, BUT
WE REALLY DON'T HAVE AN ANSWER
JUST YET.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU'RE SAYING
THE STUDY CONTINUES.
IN THE MIDDLE OF THIS, THOUGH,
IS THERE ANY NEW INFORMATION OR
ADVICE FOR WOMEN GOING THROUGH
THESE DIFFICULT SYMPTOMS?
>> I THINK ONE OF THE IMPORTANT
MESSAGES IS THAT THERE IS A HUGE
VARIABILITY AMONG WOMEN.
WE FOUND THAT ABOUT 20% ONLY
EXPERIENCED HOT FLASHES AND
NIGHT SWEATS FOR MAYBE TWO YEARS
WHILE ANOTHER PERCENTAGE FOUND
EXPERIENCED THEM FOR 14 YEARS.
THIS'S JUST A WIDE VARIABILITY
OF WHAT WOMEN EXPERIENCE AND WE
DON'T KNOW WHAT CAN EXPLAIN IT
AHEAD OF TIME FOR WOMEN, BUT FOR
THOSE WHO DO EXPERIENCE THEM A
LONG PERIOD OF TIME, WE NEED TO
FIND SOME SAFE AND EFFECTIVE
WAYS TO RELIEVE THESE SYMPTOMS.
AS OF NOW WE REALLY DON'T HAVE
GOOD METHODS ON THE LONG TERM.
PEOPLE ARE INVESTIGATING SOME
METHODS SUCH AS ACUPUNCTURE,
HYPNOSIS, MINDFULNESS, STRESS
REDUCTION.
THOSE ARE SAFE AND NECKTIVE FOR
SOME WOMEN, WORTH A TRY.
PHARMACEUTICALS POTENTIALLY, BUT
THEY SHOULD TALK TO A HEALTH
CARE PROVIDER ABOUT THOSE.
>> Woodruff: WELL, ALL VERY
INTERESTING I KNOW TO MANY, MANY
AMERICANS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, DR. NANCY
AVIS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NOW, FINDING,
TRACKING AND PROTECTING
ENDANGERED BIRDS.
LAST YEAR, A NATIONAL AUDUBON
SOCIETY REPORT FOUND CLIMATE
CHANGE IS LIKELY TO DISRUPT
THE HABITAT OF ABOUT HALF OF
NORTH AMERICA'S BIRD SPECIES BY
2080.
WHILE A NUMBER OF CONSERVATION
EFFORTS ARE BEING MADE IN
AMERICA, SCIENTISTS WANT TO GET
A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF WHERE
SOME BIRDS GO WHEN THEY LEAVE
THE U.S., IN ORDER TO PROTECT
THAT HABITAT AS WELL.
LIKE HUMANS, MANY HEAD TO WARMER
CLIMATES IN THE WINTER.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CAT WISE REPORTS
ON A NEW EFFORT TO TRACK THEM.
( BIRDS CHIRPING )
>> Reporter: AS THE SUN CAME UP
ON A RECENT MORNING, A TEAM OF
U.S. SCIENTISTS, WHO WERE
CAMPING OUT ON A REMOTE ISLAND
IN THE BAHAMAS, PACKED UP AND
LOADED THEIR GEAR INTO AN
AWAITING BOAT.
THEY WERE PART OF A NATIONAL
AUDUBON SOCIETY LED EXPEDITION,
SEARCHING THE SANDY SHORELINES
FOR A SPECIAL VISITOR TO THESE
UNINHABITED SPITS OF LAND CALLED
THE JOULTER CAYS.
>> OFTEN ON THIS END OF THE
ISLAND IS WHERE WE SEE THE
MAJORITY OF OUR SHORE BIRDS.
>> Reporter: THIS BREATHTAKING
AREA IS HOME TO DOZENS OF
SPECIES OF NATIVE AND MIGRATORY
BIRD, INCLUDING A SMALL, GRAY
SHOREBIRD CALLED A PIPING PLOVER
WHICH HAS BEEN ON THE ENDANGERED
SPECIES LIST IN THE UNITED
STATES SINCE 1986.
>> THEY FLY ABOUT 4,000 MILES
ROUND TRIP FROM THEIR BREEDING
GROUNDS, TO THEIR WINTERING
GROUNDS.
ITS AN AMAZING MIGRATION.
>> Reporter: WALKER GOLDER IS A
BIOLOGIST WITH THE NATIONAL
AUDUBON SOCIETY.
HE WAS PART OF A SMALL TEAM OF
SCIENTISTS WHO WENT LOOKING FOR
PIPING PLOVERS IN THE BAHAMAS
ABOUT FIVE YEARS AGO.
>> WE GOT TO ONE PLACE ON THE
VERY NORTHERN TIP OF THE JOULTER
CAYS AND FOUND NEARLY A HUNDRED
PIPING PLOVERS IN ONE PLACE.
THAT WAS A WONDERFUL MOMENT, AND
WE REALIZED THAT THIS IS A
SIGNIFICANT PLACE IN THE
WINTERING GROUNDS OF THIS
SPECIES.
>> Reporter: THE BIRDS, WHICH
NEST ALONG BEACHES IN EASTERN
PARTS OF THE U.S. AND CANADA,
USED TO BE A COMMON SIGHT IN
THOSE AREAS, BUT THEIR NUMBERS
HAVE DROPPED TO 8,000 WORLDWIDE.
MUCH OF THAT DECLINE CAN BE
ATTRIBUTED TO HUMAN DEVELOPMENT.
AND NOW, SAYS WALKER, LIKE MANY
SHOREBIRDS, PIPING PLOVERS ARE
ALREADY FEELING THE IMPACTS OF
FROM RISING SEA LEVELS.
>> CLIMATE CHANGE IS A SERIOUS
THREAT TO THESE BIRDS, AND
EQUALLY SERIOUS IS HOW WE REACT
TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
WHEN WE BEGIN TO TRY TO HARDEN
OUR SHORELINES, AND BUILD STONE
OR HARD STRUCTURES ON OUR
BEACHES IN AN ATTEMPT TO HOLD
BACK THE OCEAN, THE HABITAT FOR
THESE BIRDS DISAPPEARS.
WHEN WE LOSE THE HABITAT FOR
THESE BIRDS, WE LOSE THE BIRDS.
>> Reporter: FOR A NUMBER OF
YEARS NOW, A BIG EFFORT HAS BEEN
MADE TO PROTECT THE BIRDS WHILE
THEY ARE NESTING IN THE U.S.
PORTIONS OF CERTAIN EAST COAST
BEACHES ARE EVEN CLOSED OFF
DURING THEIR BREEDING SEASON, TO
THE CHAGRIN OF SOME BEACH-GOERS.
BUT UNTIL RECENTLY THEIR WINTER
HABITAT WAS A MYSTERY.
NOW THAT THE SCIENTISTS KNOW,
THEY'RE TRYING TO TRACK AND
STUDY THE BIRDS HERE.
>> LETS PULL IN HERE, YEAH, AND
SEE WHAT WE SEE.
>> Reporter: BUT FIRST, YOU HAVE
TO FIND THEM.
NO EASY TASK WITH MILES AND
MILES OF BEACHES TO SEARCH.
>> I THINK THEY'VE ALREADY LEFT.
>> Reporter: THEN, AFTER A BIT
MORE SEARCHING, SUCCESS.
>> WAIT, LOOK RIGHT OVER THERE.
LOOK LEFT.
VERY TIP IN.
YOU SEE THEM?
>> YEP!
>> YOU GOT THEM?
>> Reporter: THEY MOVED IN FOR A
CLOSER LOOK.
>> I GOT 47.
SO WE WOULD PUT ONE TO TWO NETS
HERE.
RIGHT?
>> ONE HERE AND ONE WHERE YOU
ARE.
>> Reporter: THE TEAM BEGAN
SETTING UP FOR A KEY TASK OF
THEIR EXPEDITION, TO NET AND
CAPTURE THE BIRDS.
IT TOOK SOME TIME, AND A BIT OF
PATIENCE, BUT SOON THEY WERE
LAUNCHING THEIR NETS.
AFTER REMOVING AND INSPECTING
THE BIRDS, THEY PUT EASILY
IDENTIFIABLE BANDS, PINK FOR THE
BAHAMAS, ON THEIR LEGS.
DAN CATLIN IS WITH THE VIRGINIA
TECH SHOREBIRD PROGRAM.
HE'S HELPED CAPTURE AND BAND
MORE THAN 4,000 PIPING PLOVERS.
>> WE CAN ACTUALLY SEE WHERE
EACH ONE OF THESE BIRDS IS FOUND
DURING MIGRATION AND WHERE THEY
ARE FOUND DURING THE BREEDING
SEASON.
AND SO, WE CAN START TO PUT
THESE AREAS INTO PERSPECTIVE AND
DETERMINE WHAT LEVELS OF
PROTECTION ARE NEEDED AND WHAT
IS ALREADY THERE.
>> Reporter: OVER THE COURSE OF
THEIR THREE WEEK EXPEDITION, THE
TEAM WAS ABLE TO CAPTURE 27
BIRDS.
WHILE THE PRIMARY FOCUS OF THE
SCIENTISTS HERE IS TO ADVANCE
THEIR UNDERSTANDING OF THE
PIPING PLOVER AND WHERE IT
SPENDS THE WINTER, THEY ALSO
HAVE ANOTHER GOAL: TO PRESERVE
THIS PRISTINE HABITAT BY
ENLISTING THE HELP OF THE LOCAL
COMMUNITY, THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
BAHAMAS, AND THE TENS OF
MILLIONS OF BIRD ENTHUSIASTS IN
THE U.S. AND AROUND THE WORLD.
>> HOW MANY PEOPLE WOULD LIKE TO
TAKE PEOPLE OUT BIRD WATCHING
AND GET PAID FOR IT?
( LAUGHS )
>> Reporter: MATT JEFFERY IS
WITH THE AUDUBONS INTERNATIONAL
ALLIANCES PROGRAM.
THEY WOULD LIKE TO SEE THE
JOULTER CAYS TURNED INTO A
NATIONAL PARK TO PROTECT THE
PIPING PLOVERS WINTER HABITAT
FROM THE KIND OF TOURISM AND BIG
DEVELOPMENT THAT HAVE BECOME A
HALLMARK OF THE BAHAMAS.
BUT IN ORDER TO DO THAT, THEY
NEED THE SUPPORT OF COMMUNITIES
NEAR THE JOULTERS, COMMUNITIES
THAT HAVEN'T BENEFITED MUCH FROM
TOURISM.
>> 46.7 MILLION BIRD WATCHERS IN
THE UNITED STATES.
THIS IS WHAT PEOPLE ARE PAYING
TO GO AND WATCH BIRDS, $17.3
BILLION.
DO YOU GUYS WANT SOME OF THAT?
>> YEAH!
>> Reporter: INTERESTED LOCALS
WHO COMPLETE A 14-WEEK COURSE
WILL BE GIVEN AN AUDUBON BIINGRD
CERTIFICATION BUT JEFFERY SAYS
THE REAL KEY TO THE EFFORT IS
MAKING SURE THE JOULTERS ARE
KEPT PRISTINE.
>> WE COULD GO ON FOREVER
ANSWERING SCIENCE QUESTIONS AND
WE'D LOSE THE HABITAT, SOMEBODY
WOULD COME IN AND BUILD A
RESORT, OR TAKE OUT THAT HABITAT
IF WE DON'T ADDRESS THE
CONSERVATION NEEDS RIGHT NOW.
WE REALLY NEED TO BRING
ECONOMICS INTO THE EQUATION IN
ORDER TO GET PEOPLE TO GIVE A
GREATER VALUE TO THE
ENVIRONMENTS WERE TRYING TO
CONSERVE AND PRESERVE.
>> Repoer: rtBUT NOT EVERYONE IS
ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT TURNING THE
AREA INTO A NATIONAL PARK.
PHILLIP ROLLE IS A LOCAL BONE-
FISHING GUIDE, BONES, AS THEY
ARE KNOWN, ARE FAST, HARD-TO-
CATCH FISH WHICH LIVE IN SHALLOW
WATERS.
THE SPORT IS ONE THE FEW SOURCES
OF TOURISM INCOME IN THIS AREA.
ROLLE DOESN'T WANT THE JOULTERS
TO BECOME OVERLY DEVELOPED.
BUT HE SAYS MANY LOCALS ARE
EQUALLY WORRIED ABOUT THE AREA
BECOMING OFF-LIMITS TO THEM.
>> THEY ARE CONCERNED, NOT
KNOWING EXACTLY WHAT THEY MEAN
BY BEING A PARK, WHETHER THAT
MEANS THEY CANT GO OUT AND
BONEFISH ANYMORE.
THEY THINK WHEN YOU SAY IT IS A
PARK THEN YOU CANT TOUCH IT YOU
CANT DO ANYTHING.
THAT'S WHY MOST OF THE NATIVES
ARE SAYING NO, WE DON'T WANT IT
TO BE A PARK.
>> Reporter: EVEN IF EVERYONE
AGREES GOING FORWARD, MONEY IS A
PROBLEM.W PARK RANGERS
CURRENTLY MANAGE SEVERAL MILLION
ACRES.
>> THE JOULTER CAYS IS A FAIRLY
REMOTE AREA, IT IS GOING TO
REQUIRE TWO OR THREE STAFF, ITS
GOING TO REQUIRE A BOAT."
>> Reporter: ERIC CAREY IS THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
BAHAMAS NATIONAL TRUST WHICH
MANAGES THE COUNTRY'S PARKS.
>> WE CERTAINLY BELIEVE IT MAKES
SENSEOR A F LEGISLATOR IN THE
U.S. WHEN THEY'RE THINKING ABOUT
FUNDING CONSERVATION TO NOTE
THAT IT DOESN'T MAKE SENSE TO
ONLY PROTECT WITHIN THE U.S.
BORDERS BECAUSE THESE BIRDS FLY
SOUTH.
OF COURSE IT DOESN'T TAKE AWAY
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
BAHAMAS GOVERNMENT TO PROTECT
THE ENVIRONMENT, AND WE TAKE
THAT VERY SERIOUSLY.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, BACK ON
THE JOULTERS, THE SCIENTISTS
HOPE A DECISION ABOUT WHETHER
THE AREA WILL BE TURNED INTO A
NATIONAL PARK WILL BE MADE
SOMETIME SOON.
BUT FOR NOW, THE FOCUS AROUND
THE CAMPFIRE IS ABOUT WHERE TO
LOOK FOR PLOVERS IN THE MORNING.
IM CAT WISE IN THE BAHAMAS FOR
THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
GUTSY PERSONAL ACCOUNT OF A
CRUMBLING MARRIAGE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR BOOK
CONVERSATION.
>> Brown: ALEXANDRA FULLER GREW
UP IN SOUTHERN AFRICA:
RHODESIA, NOW ZIMBABWE, MALAWI
AND ZAMBIA.
THIS BACKDROP OF WAR, BEAUTY,
HARD LIVING AND TWO ALMOST
LARGER-THAN-LIFE PARENTS HAS
BEEN THE INSPIRATION FOR
TWO BEST SELLING MEMOIRS: "DON'T
LET'S GO TO THE DOGS TONIGHT"
AND "COCKTAIL HOUR UNDER THE
TREE OF FORGETFULNESS".
NOW COMES A THIRD, "LEAVING
BEFORE THE RAINS COME," ABOUT
HER MOVE TO THE U.S., THE END OF
HER MARRIAGE, AND HER CONTINUING
CONNECTION TO ALL SHE LEFT
BEHIND IN AFRICA.
ALEXANDRA FULLER, WELCOME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: LET'S START WITH
THAT LAST THOUGHT ABOUT
CONNECTIONS TO PLACE, BECAUSE
PART OF THIS, OR AT LEAST IT
STRUCK ME ABOUT BLONDING AND NOT
BELONGING.
THAT'S SOMETHING YOU WANTED TO
EXPLORE AND GNAWS AT YOU?
>> I KNEW THAT'S JUST PART OF
THE CONDITION OF BEING A WHITE
SOUTHERN AFRICAN.
PARTICULARLY AT MY AGE, YOU'RE
JUST POSSESSED AT BIRTH AND VERY
AWARE OF IT, PARTICULARLY WHEN
YOU HAVE PARENTS LIKE MINE WHO
SORT OF FOUGHT ON WHAT I
CONSIDER THE WRONG SIDE OF
HISTORY, BUT THEN FELT THE
CONNECTION TO THAT LAND THAT
THEY STAYED.
SO YOU'RE A SORT OF LIVING
DISCONNECT.
YOU'RE WHITE AFRICAN, AND
THEN... AND YOU SORT OF PROVED
TO
PROVED -- MOVED TO THE U.S. AND
YOU LOOK LIKE WHITE,
MIDDLE-CLASS U.S. HOUSEWIFE.
>> Brown: BUT YOU'RE NOT.
>> BUT I'M AFRICAN.
>> Brown: YOUR PARENTS, WHO
YOU'VE WRITTEN ABOUT NOW IN THE
TWO MEMOIRS, I USED "LARGER THAN
LIFE" BECAUSE I WASN'T SURE WHAT
TO SAY.
THEY ARE.
YOU ALMOST CAN'T MAKE UP THESE
TWO IN A WAY.
THERE'S THE QUOTE FROM YOUR
FATHER THAT SAYS, "THE PROBLEM
WITH MOST PEOPLE IS THEY WANT TO
BE ALIVE FOR AS LONG AS POSSIBLE
WITHOUT HAVING ANY IDEA WHAT
WHATSOEVER HOW TO LIVE."
>> I THINK THE EXTRAORDINARY
THING FOR ME IS THE OLDER I GET,
THEY'RE NOT LARGER THAN LIFE,
THEY'RE SIMPLY ALIVE.
THEY'RE JUST DEEPLY AUTHENTIC.
THEY HAVE I THINK ISSUED EVERY
TRIBE THAT WOULD HAVE THEM A
MEMBER AND REALLY DEEPLY BECOME
THEMSELVES.
IT'S NOT A BAD MODEL TO FOLLOW.
>> Brown: THERE IS A PASSAGE
IN HERE I LOVED BECAUSE IT KIND
OF GOES THROUGH THE TALK WE HAVE
IN THIS COUNTRY ABOUT HOW THE
RAISE CHILDREN, YOU KNOW, AND
CODDLING THEM AND SCHEDULING
THEM.
AND YOUR FATHER SAYS, HE TELLS
DO YOU RUN AROUND FREELY AND HE
SAYS, "YOU HAVE THE WHOLE OF
BLOODY AFRICA TO PLAY IN."
I LOVE THAT.
JUST GET OUT THERE.
THAT WAS HIS PHILOSOPHY OF
PARENTING?
>> PRETTY MUCH.
MY SISTER AN I WERE LAUGHING
ABOUT THAT.
WE WERE FREE TO DO ANYTHING WE
WANTED AS LONG AS WE DIDN'T
SHOOT EACH OTHER ABOVE THE
KNEES.
THAT WAS THE LIMIT.
>> Brown: YOU LAUGH, BUT GUNS
WERE AROUND QUITE A BIT.
>> YEAH.
AND I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT I EXPLORE IN ALL MY WORK IS
THAT THERE'S THIS CONSTANT SORT
OF CONFLICT.
IT'S NOT EASY.
IT'S A LOT OF CONTRADICTIONS.
I ADORE MY FAMILY.
I DON'T LOVE THEIR POLITICS.
THEY'RE WONDERFUL PARENTS.
THEY WERE DREADFUL AT PARENTING.
I ADMIRE THEM ENORMOUSLY.
YOU KNOW, I ASSIDUOUSLY DO NOT
FOLLOW MOST OF WHAT THEY'VE TOLD
ME TO DO, AND YET THE ONE THING
MY FATHER DID SAY IS, YOU KNOW,
LIVE YOUR OWN LIFE, AND YOU'LL
KNOW IT'S YOUR OWN LIFE BECAUSE
IT'S LONELY AND IT'S
FRIGHTENING.
WHEN YOU LOOK BACK THERE WILL BE
ONLY ONE SET OF FINGERPRINTS AND
THEY'RE YOURS.
>> Brown: THIS BOOK IS A
MEMOIR OF A DIVORCE.
>> UH-HUH.
>> Brown: ONE REVIEWER HAD A
LINE I LIKED THAT SAID,
"ALEXANDRA FULLER HAS WRITTEN A
DIVORCE MEMOIR FOR PEOPLE WHO
MAY NOT LIKE DIVORCE MEMOIRS."
AND IT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE YOU
SAY THAT YOURSELF IN THE BOOK.
>> RIGHT.
>> YOU GO AROUND AND START
READING THESE THINGS AS YOUR OWN
MARRIAGE IS BREAKING UP, AND YOU
DON'T LIKE WHAT YOU'RE READING.
SO HOW DID YOU COME TO IT?
HOW DID YOU FIND YOUR WAY TO
WRITING THIS?
>> I THINK THAT'S WHAT I DO, I
WRITE AND READ AND WRITE AND
READ MY WAY INTO AND OUT OF
IDEAS AND LIFE.
THAT'S WHAT WE DO.
THAT'S WHAT STORYTELLERS DO.
AND THE CLOSEST I COULD COME TO
ANYTHING WAS ACTUALLY JOAN
DIDION'S "THE YEAR OF MAGICAL
THINKING" BECAUSE IT FELT TO ME
NOT LIKE A DIVORCE.
IT FELT TO ME KIND OF LIKE A
DEATH.
20 YEARS WITH SOMEONE WHEN
YOU'VE COMMITTED SO MUCH OF
YOURSELF, WHEN YOU HAVE MADE
SUCH AN ATTEMPT I THINK TO MOLD
YOURSELF IN A RELATIONSHIP AND
THEN FIND YOURSELF IN WHAT FEELS
LIKE REALLY SOLITARY
CONFINEMENT.
TO BREAK OUT OF THAT, THERE MUST
BE A KIND OF DEATH.
I MEAN, ANYTHING ELSE, YOU KNOW,
I THINK THE ONE THING I REALLY
WAS ALLERGIC TO IS THIS IDEA
THAT IT WAS DIVORCE WAS SOME
KIND OF CELEBRATION.
IT FELT TO ME LIKE A REALLY
CATASTROPHIC ENDING.
AND, YES, SOMETHING NEW CAME
FROM IT.
BUT IT WAS MUCH MORE CARL JUNG
THAN LET'S CELEBRATE THE FREEDOM
OF SOMETHING.
WHATEVER THE OTHER PARADIGM WAS.
>> YOU KNOW, YOU SAID YOU'RE A
WRITER SO YOU WRITE ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED.
THAT SORT OF GOES TO THE LARGER
QUESTION.
SO YOU'RE SORT OF TELLING YOUR
LIFE STORY IN ALL THESE MEMOIRS.
WHY?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I WANTED TO
BE A WRITER.
THAT WAS JUST IT.
SO I THINK YOU EITHER HAVE THAT
COMPULSION OR YOU DON'T.
IT'S FOR ME LIKE BREATHING.
I'M... I WANT TO MAKE WORDS OUT
OF LIFE.
THAT'S BIGGER THAN ME.
THAT'S AS BIG A CREATIVE FORCE
AS... BIGGER THAN FOR ME EVEN
HAVING CHILDREN.
THAT FELT MORE ACCIDENTAL.
WONDERFUL BUT ACCIDENTAL.
THIS IS A DELIBERATE AND VERY
ENORMOUS FEELING IN ME.
I DID TRY TO WRITE FICTION.
I WROTE TEN NOVELS.
THEY WERE ALL JUST AWFUL.
AND MY AGENT AT THE TIME
INSPIRED ME.
SHE SAID YOU MAY HAVE A
MINUSCULE BIT OF TALENT.
BUT YOU HAVE NO STORY, SO YOU'RE
ON YOUR OWN.
NO, WAIT, I DO HAVE A STORY.
>> Brown: AND I'M GOING TO
TELL IT.
>> AND WHAT HAPPENED IS THAT
FIRST BOOK, "DON'T LET'S GO TO
THE DOGS TONIGHT," WAS A MMR OF
GROWING UP WITH MY EXTRAORDINARY
MEMOIR, EVERYONE CALLED IT
BRUTALLY HONEST.
THAT REALLY MADE ME REALIZE HOW
MUCH EVERYONE ELSE MUST BE LYING
THROUGH THEIR TEETH ALL THE
TIME.
AND I KNEW THAT IS PART OF THE
GIFT OF GROWING UP SOUTHERN
AFRICAN.
FOR ALL OUR FAULT, WE REALLY
HASH THINGS OUT.
WE'RE VERY FUNNY.
WE'RE VERY DIRECT, AND WE'RE
VERY HONEST.
I THINK, YOU KNOW, BECAUSE
SOMEONE IS NOT WAVING A GUN AT
YOU, REALLY WHAT'S THE WORST
THING I CAN HAPPEN, LET ME TELL
THE TRUTH.
SO WE DON'T HAVE FREEDOM OF
SPEECH, AND WE USE IT.
AND FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND PEOPLE
TAKE THE FIFTH.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT.
WELL THE NEW MEMOIR IS "LEAVING
BEFORE THE RAINS COME."
ALEXANDRA FULLER, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S EXECUTIVE
ACTIONS ON IMMIGRATION WERE
STALLED BY A FEDERAL JUDGE
BUT IT WILL BE APPEALED.
AND THE WHITE HOUSE ANNOUNCED
MORE THAN 11 MILLION AMERICANS
SIGNED UP FOR PRIVATE HEALTH
COVERAGE UNDER THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, IT'S FAT TUESDAY.
READ WHAT WE DISCOVERED ABOUT
HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND REVELRY, ON
OUR HOMEPAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
BEFORE WE GO, A CORRECTION:
ON FRIDAY I SAID, THE SOON TO BE
OUTGOING GOVERNOR OF OREGON WAS
JOHN KITZ-HABER.
WE HEARD FROM MANY OF YOU, IT IS
ACTUALLY PRONOUNCED KITZ-
HAH'BER.
MY APOLOGIES.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF
AND I'M GWEN IFILL, WE'LL SEE
YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT